 72
 3. The Efficiencies
 unit Propulsive V,Pi
 Va
 b) Non - air breathing engine
 Figure 3.1: The Block diagrams of Propulsion system
 Figure 3.2: The energy balance of a propulsion system
 Newton's II law as
 (3.1)
 where the first term on the right hand side is due to the velocity change and the
 second due to the difference in pressure between the exit and the ambient. Ae
 In the case of a non-airbreathing engine (a rocket engine), the expression for
 One of the classical design conditions for the rocket nozzle is Pe = Pas since this
 ensures complete expansion. For an operational rocket, the change in altitude
 during the flight affects the second term. However, the second term is very small
 or negligible as compared to the first term. In fact, in the worst operating off-
 design conditions, the magnitude of the second term does not exceed 10 % in the
 case of rocket engines. This is not true in the case of air breathing engines always.
 In the analysis to follow, the second term will be ignored for simplicity for rocket
 Efficiencies can be defined as output/ (output + losses) or output / input. It
 must be understood that these two definitions have indeed different implications.
 Both these definitions will be used below. The losses can be several. Transmission
 and other mechanical losses are ignored for the present. The losses accounted for
 refers to the cross sectional area ofthe nozzle exit.
 thrust is
 (3.2)
 engines.
 3.3. The Propulsive Efficiency
 73
 are essentially those due to unutilized kinetic energy in the exhaust stream and
 the unavailable energy fundamental to thermodynamics. The diagram in Fig. 3.2
 illustrates the energy balance.
 3.3 The Propulsive Efficiency
 In evolving this definition, input fuel energy is not considered. The output which
 is the propulsive effect is divided by the output plus the unutilized kinetic energy
 of the exhaust stream. (This is defined in terms of power). The power due to the
 propulsive effect is FVa, where Va is the flight speed of the vehicle carrying the
 propulsive unit. The losses in the jet are estimated to be ma(Ve Va)2 / 2 since
 Veis the velocity of the jet relative to the propulsive unit, and (Ve Va)2/2 the
 kinetic energy per unit mass flow rate of the jet. Thus,
 Thrust Power = FVa
 (3.3)
 (3.4)
 3.3.1 Air Breathing Engines
 The expression for the power lost can also be written as F (Ve - Va)/2, if we note
 that F = ma(Ve Va); thus, the propulsive efficiency (p) can be written down as
 (3.5)
 where T = Va/Ve. The above expression for propulsive efficiency is valid for all air
 breathing engines with rinf / ma = f<K 1. Typical values of f for turbojets, turbo-
 prop and turbofans will be around 0.005 0.02. Only in the case of a ramjet or an
 after-burning turbojet, f is about 0.067, the stoichiometric value for a kerosene-
 air system. Even in this case the above expression is approximately valid. The
 expression that allows for non-zero f can be obtained as
 (3.6)
 It is useful to obtain the order of magnitude of the power usefully spent and lost.
 For a typical operating condition like F = 70 kN, Va = 800 km/hr (222 m/s), Ve =
 522 m/s,
 Useful power = FVa = 15.5MW
 (3.7)
 (3.8)
 Chapter 3
 The Eiliciencies ofPropulsion
 Systems
 3.1 Introduction
 In this chapter we treat the propulsive, thermal and overall efficiencies of propul-
 sion systems. As different from these, there are efficiencies related to components
 like diffuser, compressor, combustor, turbine and nozzle which will be discussed
 subsequently. The use of propulsive and related efficiencies is limited to obtaining
 an appreciation of the speed range in which a given propulsion system is most
 efficient. It must be understood that these efficiencies alone do not dominate the
 choice of a system in a specific speed range and other aspects of the mission are
 very important. In fact, specific aspects of the mission are SO over-riding that these
 efficiencies (propulsive or overall) become irrelevant. Nevertheless, much can be
 learnt about the efficiency or inefficiency of an operating system by examining it
 in the light ofthese definitions.
 3.2 Analysis
 In the analysis to follow, the propulsive system is treated as a black box that en-
 hances the exit momentum flow in relation to that of the inlet by introducing en-
 ergy generated by combustion. Figures 3.1, a and b show the specific features of
 The important distinction between the air breathing and non-air breathing
 engines is that while air is ingested in the case of air breathing engines, no free
 stream flow is ingested into the engine in the case of non-air breathing engines.
 The expression for thrust for an air breathing engine can be written following
 such a system for air breathing and non-air breathing engines.
 71
 74
 3. The Efficiencies
 NAB
 0
 1.2
 Figure 3.3: Plot of F/mV; and Tp with velocity ratio for air breathing and non-airbreathing
 engines
 (3.9)
 Thus, the enormous power oft the propulsion system and also that lost in thejet
 can be noted. Propulsive efficiencies ofthe order of 60 % are considered reasonable
 from an overall operation point of view. If we put the expressions for thrust and
 propulsive efficiency together we obtain,
 (3.10)
 (3.11)
 3.4 Further Analysis
 Figure 3.3 shows a plot of both F/(maVe) and Tp with T. If T > 1, the developed
 thrust is negative. Thus, for an air breathing engine T < 1. The maximum effi-
 ciency is obtained at T = 1, at which Tp = 1 and F = 0. Apparently, the propulsive
 units are most efficient when they do no work!. How do we interpret this situation
 in actual practice? In order to obtain a non-zero thrust and have a high propulsive
 3.4. Further Analysis
 75
 efficiency, we should let T be less than 1, i.e. the jet speed be only a little larger
 than the flight speed, SO that one can obtain the desired thrust by increasing the
 flow rate, ma- For the fixed flight speed, increased flow rates are obtained by in-
 creasing the area of cross section of the flow. This is precisely what happens in a
 propeller where a large air flow is given a small velocity increment to obtain the
 desired thrust at high propulsive efficiency (n 95 %). We raise the next question:
 If propeller devices are SO efficient, how come other devices like turbojets are also
 The answer lies in the fluid mechanics associated with propellers. The flow
 over the airfoil cross sections of the propeller blades is governed by the vector
 combination of the flight speed and the local peripheral velocity of the rotating
 blade (2m R N, R = local radius, N = rotational speed of the propeller). At flight
 speeds of 450 km/hr (125 m/s), rotational speeds of 4500 rpm (75 rps), radius of
 about 0.5 m, the peripheral speed amounts to 235 m/s. Vector velocity over the
 blades amounts to 266 m/s. Expressed in terms of Mach numbers (the ratio of
 flow velocity to the speed of sound), the local Mach number is 0.8, approaching
 ac condition which leads to drastic reduction in the efficiency of the propeller, due
 to the formation of strong acoustic waves (weak shock waves) on the surface of
 the propeller. As such, propeller devices are not used for flight speeds beyond 450
 a 500 km/hr. Hence, other devices like turbojets have evolved. Also devices like
 turbojets have a much higher thrust per unit cross section and thus, enable better
 in existence?
 packaging.
 3.4.1 Non-Air Breathing Engines (Rocket Engines)
 In the case of rocket engines, the definition for propulsive efficiency leads to
 (3.12)
 Again, if we set the expression for thrust and propulsive efficiency together we
 Itcan be seen that the thrust ofthe rocket is independent offlight speed (otherwise
 an elementary fact). The propulsive efficiency is maximum (100 %) at T = 1 (see
 Figure 3.3). One feature different from that of air breathing engines is that T can
 be greater than unity i.e. the flight speed does not always have to be less than
 jet speed. This derives from the fact that the rocket engine generates its own hot
 At the same T, the propulsive efficiency of a rocket engine is larger than that of
 an airbreathing engine. At T = 0.425 ( = 222/522.0), from the previous example, Tp
 obtain,
 (3.13)
 gases, exhausting them through the nozzle to produce thrust.
